WILLIAM BRANGHAM: But first:
It is growing season for
farmers across the Midwest, and
many are faced with yet another
tough financial forecast, as
corn and soybean prices remain
low, which means less
money in farmers' pockets.
In Nebraska, some producers are
now coming to grips with what
some say is this new reality.
From NET in Nebraska,
Jack Williams reports.
CARL SOUCEK, Farmer: This
is our little office that we
use as kind of a break room.
This is the center where we
can on the computer or order
parts or things like that.
JACK WILLIAMS: On a family
farm in Prague, Nebraska, about
40 miles north of Lincoln,
Carl Soucek is right at home.
His family has been farming
this land since the late 1940s.
They grow mostly corn and
soybeans, but the last couple
of years haven't been easy.
High prices for crops translated
to more income for farmers a
few years ago, but now those
prices have tumbled, leaving
farmers in a financial ditch.
CARL SOUCEK: The best thing
that ever happened to the corn
industry was $7 corn, and the
worst thing to happen to it
was $7 corn, because it kind of
threw everything out of balance.
And I think we will see
the cycle come back.
I don't know when it's
going to come back.
JACK WILLIAMS: While he waits,
Soucek is doing what he can
to cut costs on the farm.
Instead of taking his equipment
to the local implement dealer
for repairs, he has parts
delivered to the farm and
does those repairs himself.
How much money does that save
you, doing your own repairs?
If you had to take your tractor
in yourself, how much would
that cost you, compared to
you actually doing
this yourself?
CARL SOUCEK: Shop rates
can run anywhere from
$75 to $150 an hour.
And service calls, if they
come out from the dealership to
work on a piece of equipment,
service calls could be
another $250 on top of that.
So, if it's something we can
take care of ourselves, every
time we do that, we're saving
a little bit of money.
JACK WILLIAMS: Soucek doesn't
apologize for enjoying the
good times a few years ago.
He says farming isn't always
easy, and when prices of crops
such as corn and soybeans
shot up, many farmers' earnings
increased, and they enjoyed
a higher standard of living.
It was a lot different than
the days when they had to
watch every penny they spent.
CARL SOUCEK: If we need to
go back to that, we will.
And I think we have already.
We're careful about our family
living, and been there, done
that, and we will do it again
if we need to tighten
our belt that much.
JACK WILLIAMS: At a recent
economic workshop in Lincoln,
farmers and ranchers got a dose
of economic reality.
With falling prices of corn,
soybeans and wheat bringing
farmers less income, many are
facing more debt, tighter
margins and an uncertain future.
They're looking for guidance
as they try to navigate through
the down times without too
much damage.
JAY PARSONS, University of
Nebraska-Lincoln: They have seen
the good times, they have seen
the bad times.
They know nothing lasts forever.
And they keep track of things
and they monitor things and
they're aware of things.
But there's probably a decent
number of people out there that
haven't had that perspective
and are still trying to
adjust to the new situation.
JACK WILLIAMS: Economic factors,
such as high land costs and
skyrocketing property taxes,
are testing the resolve
of some Midwest producers.
But that might actually
be a good thing for their
long-term financial health.
TINA BARRETT, Director, Nebraska
Farm Business, Inc.: Tough
times make better managers.
And if I think about the
producers I work with, those
who had tough times in the '80s
are great managers today,
because they had to learn how
to make those tough choices,
they had to learn how to manage
their business like a business,
and they continued to do
that through the profitable
times and made a lot
of money through that.
JACK WILLIAMS: Dave Nielsen
is a third-generation
farmer in Lancaster County
in Eastern Nebraska,
where he grows corn and
soybeans on about 2,000 acres.
His father and grandfather
worked this ground before him,
so he's seen the good and bad
times.
He says the younger farmers
who got into the business a
few years ago when prices were
high are the ones who feel
the downturn the most.
DAVE NIELSEN, Farmer:
It was really tough on
young guys starting then.
Young guys starting in those
glory years, wow, this is easy.
There was a lot of youth that
came back to the farm, maybe
left jobs in town and came
back to the family
farm, to the farm.
And, you know, now it's a
whole different ball game.
Now it's, you really
have to watch what you're
spending on inputs and
family living and that.
JACK WILLIAMS: Nielsen probably
won't lime his soil this
year and, like Carl Soucek in
Prague, he's doing a lot of
his own repairs to save money.
And he's taking a hard look
at the rest of his expenses.
DAVE NIELSEN: Every
good operation should,
even in the good times.
Really, you should.
You probably -- just a little
sharper pen or a little
sharper pencil when you're in
the downturn.
JACK WILLIAMS: For the "PBS
NewsHour," I'm Jack Williams
in Lincoln, Nebraska.